---
title: Love thy enemy
date: 2025-03-02
---

## With great power...

I listened to Lex Friedman's interview on Jennifer Burns, in which she gave a beautiful and concise explanation for facism. I am paraphrasing but it went something like this:

> Facism is a movement that taps into the darkest human emotions, celebrates them and channels them to create political power.

It is a beautiful and concise way to put it. It explains much of what we see today in Gaza, in Ukraine, in the United States and in Europe as well. It explains why we see so much hate: it is because facism uses hate as a fuel for political movement and says: "You have right be angry and these are the people you should be angry to".

I believe that modern facist movement, led by Donald Trump, appeals to people because by expressing hate he creates an impression of authenticity. But they fail to realise that the reason politicians typically don't express hate is because they understand the danger it contains. By expressing hate, a politician fuels its. And history shows what that leads to.

## Love thy enemy

The only way to break the cycle is to break the circle of hate. In the US, that task falls to the moderate republicans and democrats who have to find a way to talk lovingly to those Americans who have chosen the path of hate and destruction. In the Germany, the political parties have to find a way to talk to those who vote for AfD. Locking them out of political power is not the solution: it is a lid on a cattle that is about to boil over.

Responsible politicians have to find a way to lower the heat and love thy enemy. They have to find a way to talk to the people who have fallen under the facist spell and bring them back into light. They have to learn not to dismiss those people by calling them facists and demonising them. They have to find a way to love thy enemy and see the neighbour in them.

That is the only way to break the cycle of hate.

